src/doc/gather.md, before:

# reqgather

The reqgather utility searches files for requirements.

## How will reqgather find requirements within a repo
I'm not sure if reqtangle should specify how requirements are represented within a project.
My current thought is for reqtangle to provide specifications/guidelines that can be specified on the commandline.
For example, let's say a project creates their own set of guidelines that were agreed upon through an RFC process named RFC1234.
That project can formalize those guidelines in a manor that reqgather understands.
Then when reqgather is executed, the project would specify `--spec RFC1234` which would ultimately resolve down to a config file that reqgather understands.

## Requirement management in open source
At the time of starting this project I am unaware of any open source projects officially managing requirements.
The closest thing I have observed are practices like Python's PEP and other RFC-related practices.
Those are great, but I don't think changes within those documents are traced throughout the actual source code.

I think there's a lot of potentially valid ways to represent requirements within a source directory.
There may be existing implementations already, such as existing standards or company/project guidelines.
I'm currently only aware of database oriented requirement managers (e.g. ClearCase).
I have no delusion that requirement management is a complicated job, but I feel like there needs to be a solution for open source projects.
If open source software is to be used at scale in the future there must be a way to manage requirements since there can potentially be hundreds or even thousands of contributors to a project that may affect millions or even billions of people.
When contributors make changes, they need confidence that their contributions won't break expected behavior.
Currently, best software practices utilize tools such as regression tests and continuous integration (CI) services, such as [Travis CI][0].
Regression tests are typically implemented via unit tests in many projects, however unit tests are limited in what they can test.
Generally unit tests validate logic of functions at their lowest level.
At the opposite end, there are system tests that validate logic of the entire system.
In between the system tests and unit tests are what are called functional tests, which validate interaction between subsets of parts of the system.

TDD has been a great practice for creating regression tests as software is being written.
BDD is similar, however it tackles the problem from a user's perspective.
Typcially, BDD is not a practice followed at the level of unit tests since users tend to use the system as a whole.
BDD works great for communicating human intent through scenarios that can be broken up into individual steps which are then converted to code that executes the actual software of which the BDD scenario was intended to communicate.
As you may be able to see, BDD scenarios are a great way to formalize requirements agreed upon among humans.
Those formalized requirements can then be broken down to the actual code that implements them.

## How to trace requirements down to the source code
How do projects know that a feature its users expect to exit actually exists?
In fact how does the project actually know that that feature is expected?
This information that should exist within a project's documentation, which can include the RFC's that spawned the features themselves.
There needs to be a way to identify specific requirements.
For example, requirement identifiers can exist within comments like `// [REQ1234]`.
But, just by having a tag within a source file doesn't do much since all it really does is say, "Hey, there's a requirement being implemented within this file".
We want to be able to say, "There's a requirement being satisfied in this file via these specific lines of code".
So, perhaps a better example could be `// [REQ1234:+6]`.
This example could indicate, "REQ1234 is satisfied by the following 6 lines of code".

## Initial thoughts on storing traceability
The following example shows a few examples of how I can see traceability being implemented within an open source project.
A single file would track all the linkage.
On projects that have no such file, it should be possible to generate such a file given certain assumptions that the code adheres to specifications such that `reqtangle gather` can find them.

```json
{
    "REQ1": {
        "downstream": [
            "REQ2",
            "REQ3"
        ],
        "downstream_nowarning": [
            "REQ4"
        ]
    },
    "REQ2": {
        "sha256": {
            "text": "EC2C03C9C39135792593E3CDB357F6353F20C8F74A56ED33846CBB9BD82C5031",
            "code": "79053270080EB6FFB3CE01ED06B625A025CCE0C550C777F0D59429296F06647D"
        },
        "text": [
            "The system have a variable with a value of 100."
        ],
        "code": [
            "int some_important_default_variable = 100; // [REQ5]"
        ]
    },
    "REQ4": {
        "sha256": {
            "code": "5175DE727A31F78FBFD0F46EC57F301EBE2D4B6D842062EF76443AF6EC476437"
        },
        "code": [
            "// This loop must occur because I said so.",
            "for ( int i = 0; i < 100; ++i )",
            "{",
            "   update_progress( i );",
            "}",
        ]
    }
}
```
### Example fields expanded
In the example above the fields have specific meaning and intention.
I'm thinking this file should only allow specifying requirement tracing uni-directionally in order to keep complexity down.
I don't know if that will be possible at the time of this writing.

#### "REQ1", "REQ2", etc.
The _"REQ1"_, _"REQ2"_, etc. are the requirement identifiers.
No two requirements shall have the same identifier.
These identifiers need not exist in source code themselves.

#### "sha256"
The _"sha256"_ field contains a map of SHA256 hashes for the individual pieces of the requirement.
The _"text"_ field is the hash of the actual requirement text itself.
This is required so that downstream requirements affected by the changing of requirement intent can be detected and reviewed.
The _"code"_ field is the has of the actual code implementation.
This is required so that if that code ever changes it can be detected and reviewed to ensure the requirement(s) are still satisfied.

#### "text"
The _"text"_ field contains the actual requirement text expressing the intent that needs to be implemented by the code.
This field _can_ be optional if the _"code"_ field exists, but that _should_ be an exceptional case.
What this allows for is the ability to trace code only, even if there is no explicit requirement for its existence.
This can be used to ensure that if specific code gets changed that it raises a red flag to developers.
However, without an explanation it doesn't provide much context.
In this case the explanation should be stored completely in the source file itself, thus negating the need to store it in this file.

#### "code"
The _"code"_ field contains the actual code implementing this requirement.
This field _can_ be optional if the _"text"_ field exists, but that _should_ be an exceptional case.
What this allows for is the ability to trace the requirement only, even if there is no explicit code implementing it.
This can be used to ensure that if specific requirement text gets changed that it raises a red flag to developers.

#### "downstream"
The _"downstream"_ field contains a list of downstream requirements this requirement affects.
The term "downstream" means, relative to the current requirement, it affects other requirements.
Alternatively, the "downstream" requirements have a dependency on this requirement.
If any requirement in this array is no longer satisfied, then a warning or error will be output from `reqtangle check`.

#### "downstream_nowarning"
The _"downstream_nowarning"_ field has the same purpose as the _"downstream"_ field, but with the intent of not producing a warning if the downstream requirements are no longer satisfied.
This may be required on large projects that want the traceability, but not the verbose output produced by not adhering to specific requirements.

# Links
I used the following Google search term to find relevant links to this topic: _"trace requirements to code"_.

* [embedded.com article: Software Standards Compliance 101: Tracing code to requirements][2] - some insights into perhaps the origins of tracing requirements to code

The following links are tools that exist that perform traceability to code:
* [YAKINDU Traceability][3] - looks like they use pattern matching to find tags in files
* [inflectra][4] - looks like heavy usage of Requirements Traceability Matrix (RTM)

The following links are white papers on tracing requirements to source code.
They are behind paywalls, so I may try to ask their owners if they can be made available for free for an open source project.
* [Analyzing the Tracing of Requirements and Source Code during Software Development][5]
** Have not read
* [Tracing Requirements and Source Code during Software Development: An Empirical Study][6]
** Defined 3 processes for creating traceability links between requirements and code (severely summarized below)
*** Process A: capture requirements before coding and link the code to the new requirements.
*** Process B: code before linking requirements and link when committing code.
*** Process C: link requirements to existing code already committed.

[0]: https://travis-ci.org
[1]: https://automationpanda.com/2017/01/30/bdd-101-writing-good-gherkin/
[2]: https://www.embedded.com/design/safety-and-security/4441700/Software-Standards-Compliance-101--Tracing-code-to-requirements
[3]: https://blogs.itemis.com/en/feature-of-the-month-march-2017-tracing-requirements-and-source-code
[4]: https://www.inflectra.com/ideas/topic/requirements-traceability.aspx
[5]: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-642-37422-7_22
[6]: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6681335

Commit message:

Added thoughts on invasive and invasive methodology

src/doc/gather.md, after:

# reqgather

The reqgather utility searches files for requirements.

## How will reqgather find requirements within a repo
I'm not sure if reqtangle should specify how requirements are represented within a project.
My current thought is for reqtangle to provide specifications/guidelines that can be specified on the commandline.
For example, let's say a project creates their own set of guidelines that were agreed upon through an RFC process named RFC1234.
That project can formalize those guidelines in a manor that reqgather understands.
Then when reqgather is executed, the project would specify `--spec RFC1234` which would ultimately resolve down to a config file that reqgather understands.

### Invasive
As far as tracing a requirement to the actual code that implements it, the invasive way would mean modifying the codebase in a way that reqtangle understands.
The most obvious way would be to have special identifiers, such as `[REQxxxx]` within comments, that can easily be parsed.

I feel like the invasive methodology can get out of hand pretty quick, especially if requirements change often.
Commenting code in open source projects is typcially avoided for multiple reasons.

### Noninvasive
Tracing requirements within source code without modifying the source code itself means data would need to be stored separately.
I believe this is how most requirement manager software currently is implemented.
My thoughts on this would be to store this data within the source repo along with the source code and consider it part of the source.

## Requirement management in open source
At the time of starting this project I am unaware of any open source projects officially managing requirements.
The closest thing I have observed are practices like Python's PEP and other RFC-related practices.
Those are great, but I don't think changes within those documents are traced throughout the actual source code.

I think there's a lot of potentially valid ways to represent requirements within a source directory.
There may be existing implementations already, such as existing standards or company/project guidelines.
I'm currently only aware of database oriented requirement managers (e.g. ClearCase).
I have no delusion that requirement management is a complicated job, but I feel like there needs to be a solution for open source projects.
If open source software is to be used at scale in the future there must be a way to manage requirements since there can potentially be hundreds or even thousands of contributors to a project that may affect millions or even billions of people.
When contributors make changes, they need confidence that their contributions won't break expected behavior.
Currently, best software practices utilize tools such as regression tests and continuous integration (CI) services, such as [Travis CI][0].
Regression tests are typically implemented via unit tests in many projects, however unit tests are limited in what they can test.
Generally unit tests validate logic of functions at their lowest level.
At the opposite end, there are system tests that validate logic of the entire system.
In between the system tests and unit tests are what are called functional tests, which validate interaction between subsets of parts of the system.

TDD has been a great practice for creating regression tests as software is being written.
BDD is similar, however it tackles the problem from a user's perspective.
Typcially, BDD is not a practice followed at the level of unit tests since users tend to use the system as a whole.
BDD works great for communicating human intent through scenarios that can be broken up into individual steps which are then converted to code that executes the actual software of which the BDD scenario was intended to communicate.
As you may be able to see, BDD scenarios are a great way to formalize requirements agreed upon among humans.
Those formalized requirements can then be broken down to the actual code that implements them.

## How to trace requirements down to the source code
How do projects know that a feature its users expect to exit actually exists?
In fact how does the project actually know that that feature is expected?
This information that should exist within a project's documentation, which can include the RFC's that spawned the features themselves.
There needs to be a way to identify specific requirements.
For example, requirement identifiers can exist within comments like `// [REQ1234]`.
But, just by having a tag within a source file doesn't do much since all it really does is say, "Hey, there's a requirement being implemented within this file".
We want to be able to say, "There's a requirement being satisfied in this file via these specific lines of code".
So, perhaps a better example could be `// [REQ1234:+6]`.
This example could indicate, "REQ1234 is satisfied by the following 6 lines of code".

## Initial thoughts on storing traceability
The following example shows a few examples of how I can see traceability being implemented within an open source project.
A single file would track all the linkage.
On projects that have no such file, it should be possible to generate such a file given certain assumptions that the code adheres to specifications such that `reqtangle gather` can find them.

```json
{
    "REQ1": {
        "downstream": [
            "REQ2",
            "REQ3"
        ],
        "downstream_nowarning": [
            "REQ4"
        ]
    },
    "REQ2": {
        "sha256": {
            "text": "EC2C03C9C39135792593E3CDB357F6353F20C8F74A56ED33846CBB9BD82C5031",
            "code": "79053270080EB6FFB3CE01ED06B625A025CCE0C550C777F0D59429296F06647D"
        },
        "text": [
            "The system have a variable with a value of 100."
        ],
        "code": [
            "int some_important_default_variable = 100; // [REQ5]"
        ]
    },
    "REQ4": {
        "sha256": {
            "code": "5175DE727A31F78FBFD0F46EC57F301EBE2D4B6D842062EF76443AF6EC476437"
        },
        "code": [
            "// This loop must occur because I said so.",
            "for ( int i = 0; i < 100; ++i )",
            "{",
            "   update_progress( i );",
            "}",
        ]
    }
}
```
### Example fields expanded
In the example above the fields have specific meaning and intention.
I'm thinking this file should only allow specifying requirement tracing uni-directionally in order to keep complexity down.
I don't know if that will be possible at the time of this writing.

#### "REQ1", "REQ2", etc.
The _"REQ1"_, _"REQ2"_, etc. are the requirement identifiers.
No two requirements shall have the same identifier.
These identifiers need not exist in source code themselves.

#### "sha256"
The _"sha256"_ field contains a map of SHA256 hashes for the individual pieces of the requirement.
The _"text"_ field is the hash of the actual requirement text itself.
This is required so that downstream requirements affected by the changing of requirement intent can be detected and reviewed.
The _"code"_ field is the has of the actual code implementation.
This is required so that if that code ever changes it can be detected and reviewed to ensure the requirement(s) are still satisfied.

#### "text"
The _"text"_ field contains the actual requirement text expressing the intent that needs to be implemented by the code.
This field _can_ be optional if the _"code"_ field exists, but that _should_ be an exceptional case.
What this allows for is the ability to trace code only, even if there is no explicit requirement for its existence.
This can be used to ensure that if specific code gets changed that it raises a red flag to developers.
However, without an explanation it doesn't provide much context.
In this case the explanation should be stored completely in the source file itself, thus negating the need to store it in this file.

#### "code"
The _"code"_ field contains the actual code implementing this requirement.
This field _can_ be optional if the _"text"_ field exists, but that _should_ be an exceptional case.
What this allows for is the ability to trace the requirement only, even if there is no explicit code implementing it.
This can be used to ensure that if specific requirement text gets changed that it raises a red flag to developers.

#### "downstream"
The _"downstream"_ field contains a list of downstream requirements this requirement affects.
The term "downstream" means, relative to the current requirement, it affects other requirements.
Alternatively, the "downstream" requirements have a dependency on this requirement.
If any requirement in this array is no longer satisfied, then a warning or error will be output from `reqtangle check`.

#### "downstream_nowarning"
The _"downstream_nowarning"_ field has the same purpose as the _"downstream"_ field, but with the intent of not producing a warning if the downstream requirements are no longer satisfied.
This may be required on large projects that want the traceability, but not the verbose output produced by not adhering to specific requirements.

# Links
I used the following Google search term to find relevant links to this topic: _"trace requirements to code"_.

* [embedded.com article: Software Standards Compliance 101: Tracing code to requirements][2] - some insights into perhaps the origins of tracing requirements to code

The following links are tools that exist that perform traceability to code:
* [YAKINDU Traceability][3] - looks like they use pattern matching to find tags in files
* [inflectra][4] - looks like heavy usage of Requirements Traceability Matrix (RTM)

The following links are white papers on tracing requirements to source code.
They are behind paywalls, so I may try to ask their owners if they can be made available for free for an open source project.
* [Analyzing the Tracing of Requirements and Source Code during Software Development][5]
** Have not read
* [Tracing Requirements and Source Code during Software Development: An Empirical Study][6]
** Defined 3 processes for creating traceability links between requirements and code (severely summarized below)
*** Process A: capture requirements before coding and link the code to the new requirements.
*** Process B: code before linking requirements and link when committing code.
*** Process C: link requirements to existing code already committed.

[0]: https://travis-ci.org
[1]: https://automationpanda.com/2017/01/30/bdd-101-writing-good-gherkin/
[2]: https://www.embedded.com/design/safety-and-security/4441700/Software-Standards-Compliance-101--Tracing-code-to-requirements
[3]: https://blogs.itemis.com/en/feature-of-the-month-march-2017-tracing-requirements-and-source-code
[4]: https://www.inflectra.com/ideas/topic/requirements-traceability.aspx
[5]: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-642-37422-7_22
[6]: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6681335
